015. Python String strip() Function

## What is Python strip()?
Python strip() function is a part of built-in functions available in the Python library. The strip() method removes given characters from start and end of the original string. By default, strip() function removes white spaces from start and end of the string and returns the same string without white spaces.


## Syntax of the strip() method
```text
string.strip([characters])
```
### Parameters
- characters : (optional) The given characters will be removed from the start or end of the original string.
- If the characters parameter is not given, the whitespaces from the start and end of the string will be removed.
### Return Value
The Python String strip() will return:
- The original string with white spaces removed from the start and end if the characters to be removed are not specified.
- In case the string does not have any whitespaces at the start or end, the string will be returned as it is and will match with the original string.
- If the characters parameter is given, and if the characters are given matches, the characters at the start or end of the string will be removed from the original string, and the rest of the string will be returned.
- Incase if the characters given does not match the start or the end in the original string, the string will be returned as it is.

# Examples of strip() Function in Python
## Example 1: strip() Method in Python
```python
str1 = "Welcome to Guru99!"
after_strip = str1.strip()
```
Output:
```text
Welcome to Guru99!
```
## Example 2: strip() on Invalid Data Type
The Python String strip() function works only on strings and will return an error if used on any other data type like list, tuple, etc.

Example when used on list()
```python
mylist = ["a", "b", "c", "d"]
print(mylist.strip())
```
The above will throw an error :
```text
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "teststrip.py", line 2, in <module>
    print(mylist.strip())
AttributeError: 'list' object has no attribute 'strip'
```
## Example 3: strip() Without character parameter
```python
str1 = "Welcome to Guru99!"
after_strip = str1.strip()
print(after_strip)

str2 = "Welcome to Guru99!"
after_strip1 = str2.strip()
print(after_strip1)
```
Output:
```text

Welcome to Guru99!
Welcome to Guru99!
```
## Example 4: strip() Passing character parameters
```python
str1 = "****Welcome to Guru99!****"
after_strip = str1.strip("*")
print(after_strip)

str2 = "Welcome to Guru99!"
after_strip1 = str2.strip("99!")
print(after_strip1)
str3 = "Welcome to Guru99!"
after_strip3 = str3.strip("to")
print(after_strip3)
````
Output:
```text
Welcome to Guru99!
Welcome to Guru
Welcome to Guru99!
```
## Why Python strip() function is used?
Here, are reasons for using Python strip function

- It helps to remove the characters at the start of the string and also at the end of the string based on the characters given to be removed from the original string.
- If the characters given do not match the original string, the string will be returned as it is.
- If the characters to be removed are not specified, then the whitespaces from the start and end of the original string will be removed.
- If there is no white space at the start or end than the string will be returned as it is.
## Summary:
- The Python String strip() method is part of the built-in function available in python. The function will remove given characters from the start and end of the original string.
- This function is very helpful in removing the whitespaces at the start and end of the given string, as shown in the example.
- It helps to remove the characters at the start of the string and also at the end of the string based on the characters given to be removed from the original string.
- If the characters given do not match the original string, the string will be returned as it is.
- If the characters to be removed are not specified, the whitespaces from the start and end of the original string will be removed.
- If there is no white space at the start or end than the string will be returned as it is.
