033. Python New line

Python print() built-in function is used to print the given content inside the command prompt. The default functionality of Python print is that it adds a newline character at the end.

## Working of Normal print() function
The print() function is used to display the content in the command prompt or console. Here is an example that shows the working of Python print without newline function.
```python
print("Hello World")
print("Welcome to Guru99 Tutorials")
```
Output
```text
Hello World
Welcome to Guru99 Tutorials
```
In the given output, you can see that the strings that we have given in print() are displayed on separate lines. The string "Hello World " is printed first, and "Welcome to Guru99 Tutorials" is printed on the next line.


## How to print without a newline in Python?
From Python 3+, there is an additional parameter introduced for print() called end=. This parameter takes care of removing the newline that is added by default in print().

In the Python 3 print without newline example below, we want the strings to print on same line in Python. To get that working just add end="" inside print() as shown in the example below:
```python
print("Hello World ", end="")
print("Welcome to Guru99 Tutorials")
```
Output:
```text
Hello World Welcome to Guru99 Tutorials
```
We are getting the output that we wanted, but there is no space between the strings. The string Hello World and Welcome to Guru99 Tutorials are printed together without any space.

In order to add space or special character or even string to be printed, the same can be given to the end="" argument, as shown in the example below.
```python
print("Hello World ", end=" ")
print("Welcome to Guru99 Tutorials")
```
So I here we have added one space to the end argument, for example (end=" "). Now, if you see the output, you should see a space between Hello World and Welcome to Guru99 Tutorials.

Output:
```text
Hello World  Welcome to Guru99 Tutorials
```
It's not only space that you can give to the end argument, but you can also specify a string you wish to print between the given strings. So here is an example of it
```python
print("Hello World ", end="It's a nice day! ")
print("Welcome to Guru99 Tutorials")
```
Output:
```text
Hello, World It's a nice day!  Welcome to Guru99 Tutorials
```
## Print Without Newline in Python 2.x
To get the strings to print without a newline, in python2.x you will have to add a comma (,) at the end of the print statement as shown below:
```python
print "Hello World ", 
print "Welcome to Guru99 Tutorials."
```
Output:
```text
Hello World  Welcome to Guru99 Tutorials
```
## Using Python sys module
Yet another method that you can use to print without newline in Python is the built-in module called **sys.**

Here is a working example that shows how to make use of the sys module to print without newline Python strings.

To work with the sys module, first, import the module **sys** using **the import** keyword. Next, make use of the stdout.write() method available inside **the sys** module, to print your strings.
```python
import sys

sys.stdout.write("Hello World ")
sys.stdout.write("Welcome to Guru99 Tutorials")
```
Output:
```text

Hello World Welcome to Guru99 Tutorials
```
## Using print() to print a list without a newline
Consider a list of items for example: mylist = ["PHP", JAVA", "C++", "C", "PHYTHON"] and you want to print the values inside the list using for-loop. So here you can make use of print() to display the values inside the list as shown in the example below:
```python
mylist = ["PHP", "JAVA", "C++", "C", "PHYTHON"]
for i in mylist:
	print(i)
```
Output:
```text
PHP
JAVA
C++
C
PHYTHON
```
The output shows the list items, each printed one after another, on a new line. What if you want all the items on the list in the same line? For that, make use of end argument inside print() that will remove new line in Python and print all items of the list in the same line.
```python
mylist = ["PHP", "JAVA", "C++", "C", "PYTHON"]
for i in mylist:
	print(i, end=" ")
```
Output:
```text
PHP JAVA C++ C PHYTHON
```
Printing the star(*) pattern without newline and space
The example of Python print without newline will make use of print() function to print stars(*) on the same line using for-loop.
```python
for i in range(0, 20):
    print('*', end="")
```
Output:
```text
********************
```
## Summary:
- Python print() built-in function is used to print the given content inside the command prompt. The default functionality of Python print is that it adds a newline character at the end.
- From Python 3+, there is an additional parameter introduced for print() called end=. The param end= takes care of removing the newline that is added by default in print().
- In python2.x you can add a comma (,) at the end of the print statement that will remove newline from print Python.
- Another method that you can use for Python print no newline is the built-in module called sys.